docs for mcp and simulated users (#16)
eval-protocol/eval-protocol: mcp-extensions.mdx

---
title: MCP Control/Data Planes
sidebarTitle: MCP Extensions
---

> EP adopts a clear split between the data plane (MCP calls that carry observations) and the control plane (HTTP endpoints for rewards, termination, and lifecycle). This separation improves reproducibility, session awareness, and failure recovery.

Reviewer: I would add a bit more detail. The separation of concerns here was hard for me to grasp initially, may be confusing for others too:

```suggestion
EP separates agent evaluation into two independent planes: data plane (MCP tool calls carrying observations) and control plane (HTTP endpoints for rewards and termination). This architectural split prevents observation/reward coupling that breaks caching and session isolation, while enabling graceful failure recovery—if reward calculation fails, agents still receive observations and evaluations continue with safe defaults.
```

## The Split

- Data plane (MCP): `list_tools`, `call_tool`, `list_resources`/`read_resource`.

>   - Purpose: tool schemas and observations only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Purpose: tool schemas and observations only--what the agent receives.
```

- Control plane (HTTP): `/control/*` endpoints with `mcp-session-id` header.

>   - Purpose: initial state, reward, status (terminated/truncated), and reset.

Reviewer: you had a diagram here before, should we add it: 
<img width="1396" height="1184" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/99f43741-0c16-4cac-bd4e-24c4df0c456d" />

EP’s client enforces this separation in [MCPConnectionManager](https://github.com/eval-protocol/python-sdk/blob/main/eval_protocol/mcp/client/connection.py) and [GeneralMCPVectorEnv](https://github.com/eval-protocol/python-sdk/blob/main/eval_protocol/mcp/session/manager.py).

## Control Plane Endpoints

Servers should implement the following endpoints alongside their MCP transport (e.g., at `https://your-server.example/mcp` for MCP, and `https://your-server.example/control/...` for control):

- `POST /control/reset_session`
  - Headers: `mcp-session-id: <session_id>`
  - Body: `{ "seed": <int|null> }`
  - Use: cleanup/reseed before a rollout or at close.

- `GET /control/initial_state`
  - Headers: `mcp-session-id: <session_id>`
  - Returns: JSON initial observation/state used to seed the first user prompt.

- `GET /control/reward`
  - Headers: `mcp-session-id: <session_id>`
  - Returns: `{ "reward": <float> }` for the most recent step.

- `GET /control/status`
  - Headers: `mcp-session-id: <session_id>`
  - Returns: `{ "terminated": <bool>, "truncated": <bool> }` to indicate episode end.

Notes:

> - EP generates a stable `session_id` per dataset row + model via `gen_session_id(...)` and passes it in MCP `clientInfo` and as the control-plane header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- EP generates a stable `session_id` by hashing dataset row values and the model ID via `gen_session_id(...)` and passes it in MCP `clientInfo` and as the control-plane header. Heads up: it does not use run ID, so between runs, the MCP server needs to be restarted. This is automatically done in the current implementation of `MCPGymRolloutProcessor()`.
```

> - The simulator framework ([SimulationServerBase](https://github.com/eval-protocol/python-sdk/blob/main/eval_protocol/mcp/simulation_server.py)) demonstrates session-aware design but you still need to expose the `/control/*` endpoints in your production server.

Reviewer: `SimulationServerBase` is not used, do we want to expose this? it might confuse the model.

## End-to-End Flows

### 1) Initialization

1. EP opens a streamable MCP session and sends `clientInfo` with `session_id`, `seed`, `config`, and `model_id`.
2. EP pre-warms tool schemas via `list_tools` (data plane) and caches them.
3. EP fetches initial state via `GET /control/initial_state` (control plane); if that times out or fails, it falls back to `list_resources`/`read_resource` (data plane) heuristics.
4. The initial observation seeds the first user prompt with your `user_prompt_template`.

Key guarantees:

- Initial state is session-aware (derived from control plane when available).
- Tool schemas are cached per `base_url` to avoid thundering herds.

### 2) Step Execution (per agent turn)

1. Policy returns one or more MCP tool calls based on tool schemas and conversation history.
2. EP executes the tool call via `call_tool` (data plane) and parses the observation from tool content.
3. EP queries control plane for reward and status:
   - `GET /control/reward` → scalar reward
   - `GET /control/status` → `terminated`/`truncated`
4. EP attaches a control-plane step summary to the conversation for logging, including reward, termination, and tool calls.

Separation:

> - Observations never come from control plane endpoints; rewards/termination never come from tool results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Observations never come from control plane endpoints.
- Rewards/termination never come from tool results.
```
